
What happens When a PC Powers-up?

When you turn it on, a computer's power supply must bring all the 
separate voltages required by the Motherboard and peripheral components 
to an acceptable level with enough current to power the whole system. 
These voltages include both + and - (plus and minus) 12.0 V (volts), + 
and - 5.00 V and most likely +3.30 V (which may be reduced even further 
by circuits on the motherboard for the latest power efficient 
processors). [ Note: All these voltages will vary slightly for each 
combination of power supply, motherboard, disk drives and various 
peripherals (since all electronic components drawing current will alter 
the power supply's load), but they should never fluctuate by much (if at 
all) upon reaching their operating levels. If a power supply isn't quiet 
enough (i.e, it has too much AC noise on any of its outputs), the 
motherboard's BIOS chip may not function correctly; or more likely, the 
Memory portion of the Power-On Self Test will fail. Either way, the 
system will never boot up completely! In locations where the AC input 
from the power company experiences occasional problems or total loss 
thereof, devices which store up power for a some minutes, allowing you 
to save your data and properly shut-down the system, should be used. ]

Due to the sensitive nature of some IC chips (Integrated Circuits inside 
small metal, ceramic or plastic packages), especially the CPU (Central 
Processing Unit; which produces a great deal of heat, thus the reason 
for a large metal heatsink and fan on it), the motherboard may never be 
allowed to power up until a power good signal is received from the power 
supply. This may take over half a second; a tremendously long time when 
compared to the speed of a CPU that can step through millions of 
instructions per second (MIPS), yet it often seems almost instantaneous 
to its human operator.

By the time you notice the sound of a fan rotating or drive motor 
spinning up, the voltages have already stabilized, power has been 
applied to all the chips (the interface chips that facilitate 
communications between the CPU and the Memory modules; along with any 
audio, video or LAN cards plugged into bus connectors, and the 
controllers for peripheral devices such as keyboard, mouse, hard disk 
and CD/DVD drives) and the motherboard's Clock-pulses are already 
synchronizing all those interactions. In what feels like a fleeting 
moment to us, the PC is already executing instructions from the BIOS 
(Basic Input/Output System) chip.

When the processor first starts up, it is suffering from amnesia; there 
is nothing at all in the memory to execute. Of course processor makers 
know this will happen, so they pre-program the processor to always look 
at the same place in the system BIOS ROM for the start of the BIOS boot 
program. This is normally location FFFF0h, right at the end of the 
system memory. They put it there so that the size of the ROM can be 
changed without creating compatibility problems. Since there are only 16 
bytes left from there to the end of conventional memory, this location 
just contains a "jump" instruction telling the processor where to go to 
find the real BIOS startup program.

3. The BIOS performs the power-on self test (POST). If there are any 
fatal errors, the boot process stops. POST beep codes can be found in 
this area of the Troubleshooting Expert.

4. The BIOS looks for the video card. In particular, it looks for the 
video card's built in BIOS program and runs it. This BIOS is normally 
found at location C000h in memory. The system BIOS executes the video 
card BIOS, which initializes the video card. Most modern cards will 
display information on the screen about the video card. (This is why on 
a modern PC you usually see something on the screen about the video card 
before you see the messages from the system BIOS itself).

5. The BIOS then looks for other devices' ROMs to see if any of them 
have BIOSes. Normally, the IDE/ATA hard disk BIOS will be found at 
C8000h and executed. If any other device BIOSes are found, they are 
executed as well.

6. The BIOS displays its startup screen.

7. The BIOS does more tests on the system, including the memory count-up 
test which you see on the screen. The BIOS will generally display a text 
error message on the screen if it encounters an error at this point; 
these error messages and their explanations can be found in this part of 
the Troubleshooting Expert.

8. The BIOS performs a "system inventory" of sorts, doing more tests to 
determine what sort of hardware is in the system. Modern BIOSes have 
many automatic settings and will determine memory timing (for example) 
based on what kind of memory it finds. Many BIOSes can also dynamically 
set hard drive parameters and access modes, and will determine these at 
roughly this time. Some will display a message on the screen for each 
drive they detect and configure this way. The BIOS will also now search 
for and label logical devices (COM and LPT ports).

9. If the BIOS supports the Plug and Play standard, it will detect and 
configure Plug and Play devices at this time and display a message on 
the screen for each one it finds. See here for more details on how PnP 
detects devices and assigns resources.

10. The BIOS will display a summary screen about your system's 
configuration. Checking this page of data can be helpful in diagnosing 
setup problems, although it can be hard to see because sometimes it 
flashes on the screen very quickly before scrolling off the top.

11. The BIOS begins the search for a drive to boot from. Most modern 
BIOSes contain a setting that controls if the system should first try to 
boot from the floppy disk (A:) or first try the hard disk (C:). Some 
BIOSes will even let you boot from your CD-ROM drive or other devices, 
depending on the boot sequence BIOS setting.

12. Having identified its target boot drive, the BIOS looks for boot 
information to start the operating system boot process. If it is 
searching a hard disk, it looks for a master boot record at cylinder 0, 
head 0, sector 1 (the first sector on the disk); if it is searching a 
floppy disk, it looks at the same address on the floppy disk for a 
volume boot sector.

13. If it finds what it is looking for, the BIOS starts the process of 
booting the operating system, using the information in the boot sector. 
At this point, the code in the boot sector takes over from the BIOS. The 
DOS boot process is described in detail here. If the first device that 
the system tries (floppy, hard disk, etc.) is not found, the BIOS will 
then try the next device in the boot sequence, and continue until it 
finds a bootable device.

14. If no boot device at all can be found, the system will normally 
display an error message and then freeze up the system. What the error 
message is depends entirely on the BIOS, and can be anything from the 
rather clear "No boot device available" to the very cryptic "NO ROM 
BASIC - SYSTEM HALTED". This will also happen if you have a bootable 
hard disk partition but forget to set it active.